Monthly report of August 2024 (#11)
cardano-scaling/website: monthly/2024-08-monthly.md

---
title: August 2024
slug: 2024-08
authors: [ch1bo, noonio, jpraynaud, v0d1ch, ffakenz]
tags: [monthly]
---

> This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since July 2024. This document serves as a preparation for and a written summary of the monthly stakeholder review meeting, which is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month, the meeting was held on 2024-08-28 using these [slides][slides] and [you can see the recording here][recording].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a monthly report on the progress of the 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since July 2024. This document serves as both preparation for and a written summary of the monthly stakeholder review meeting, announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month, the meeting took place on 2024-08-28, using these [slides][slides] and [you can see the recording here][recording].
```

Author: FWIW you have reviewed the exact same paragraph the last couple of months and had nothing to suggest :)

Reviewer 2: Both versions are fine. 
I'd agree that dropping 'which is' for conciseness is better, and I like the phrase 'took place' rather than 'held' more. 
Please see which one you like more.

## Mithril

[Issues and pull requests closed in August](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-07-31..2024-08-31)

### Roadmap

Here is an update on our current roadmap:

> - **Cardano transactions signature/proving MVP** [#1457](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1457): the feature is finalized and the last step to completion is to release on the `mainnet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cardano transactions signature/proving MVP** [#1457](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1457): The feature is finalized, and the last step to completion is to release on the `mainnet`.
```

Reviewer 2: Found a way to edit suggestions directly. Review of the following suggestions in progress.

Author: These items are referring to actual github issues so their wording (before the ":") should not change IMO.

> - **Cardano Stake Distribution certification** [#955](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/955): the feature is finalized and the last step is to release on `preview`, `preprod` and `mainnet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cardano Stake Distribution certification** [#955](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/955): The feature is finalized, and the last step is to release on `preview`, `preprod` and `mainnet`.
```

Reviewer 2: - **Cardano stake distribution certification** [#955](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/955): the feature is finalized, and the last step is its release on `preview`, `preprod`, and `mainnet` environments.

> - **Mithril signature diffusion with Cardano network layer PoC** [#1837](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1837): the proof-of-concept is completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Mithril signature diffusion with Cardano network layer PoC** [#1837](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1837): The proof-of-concept is completed.
```

> - **Decentralization of signature orchestration** [#1777](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1777): we have started implementing the feature with some preliminary works. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Decentralization of signature orchestration** [#1777](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1777): We have started implementing the feature with some preliminary works. 
```

> - **CIP for Mithril signature diffusion through Cardano network** [#1775](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1775): the draft CIP has been published on the Cardano foundation CIPs repository and is under review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **CIP for Mithril signature diffusion through Cardano network** [#1775](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1775): The draft CIP has been published on the Cardano foundation CIPs repository and is under review.
```

### Distributions

We have released the new Mithril distribution [`2430.0`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2430.0). This distribution includes several critical updates and enhancements:

> - Support for **Cardano node** `9.1.0`.
> - Support for **Cardano transactions** certification in `release-preprod` and `pre-release-preview`.
> - Bug fixes and performance improvements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support for **Cardano node** `9.1.0`
- Support for **Cardano transactions** certification in `release-preprod` and `pre-release-preview`
- Bug fixes and performance improvements.
```

#### Future distributions

> We have planned to release a new distributions in September after the **Chang** hardfork:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We plan to release new distributions in September following the **Chang** hardfork:
```

- `2436`:
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano transactions** in the `release-mainnet` network.
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano stake distribution** in `pre-release-preview`, `release-preprod` and `release-mainnet`

### Protocol status

![](img/2024-08-mithril-protocol-status.png)
<small><center>Latest status of the Mithril protocol on Cardano `mainnet`</center></small>

### Cardano stake distribution certification

We have completed the implementation of the Cardano stake distribution certification with Mithril and are currently preparing for the rollout of this feature to production:

- We have implemented a new type of data certified for the latest snapshot of the Cardano stake distribution done by the Cardano node at the end of each epoch.
- Under the hood, we use a Merkle tree representation of the stake distribution and sign its Merkle root.
- The Mithril clients (library, CLI and WASM) have the capability to download and verify a snapshot of the Cardano stake distribution.

> - We are preparing for activating the feature in the `release-preview`, `release-preprod` and `release-mainnet` networks with the release of the next Mithril distribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We are preparing to activate the feature in the `release-preview`, `release-preprod`, and `release-mainnet` networks with the release of the next Mithril distribution.
```

> - We have created some documentation and example code implementation for developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We have created documentation and some example code implementation for developers.
```

## Hydra

[Issues and pull requests closed in August](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-07-31..2024-08-31)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2024-08-hydra-roadmap.jpg)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) with features and ideas</center></small>

Notable updates on our [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) this month are:

> - Incremental decommits, Conway support fixes, and more were released in [0.18.0](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.18.0)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Incremental decommits, Conway support fixes, and more released in [0.18.0](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.18.0)
```

> - New landing page, SSL support, and bugixes around transaction pruning release in [0.18.1](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.18.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New landing page, SSL support, and bug fixes around transaction pruning were released in [0.18.1](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.18.1)
```

- Incremental commits (coming in a 0.19 release) have pivoted to a deposit-based scheme based on [open discussions](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/199) (thanks [@GeorgeFlerovsky!](https://github.com/GeorgeFlerovsky))

> - Ready to shift ledger to Conway when hardfork is complete [#1338](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1338)
> - Settled on [Partial Fanout](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1468) as a good solution to [a few known problems](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/docs/known-issues#head-protocol-limits)
> - Initial work on a suite of network-resiliance tests [#1552](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1552)
> - The Hydra Doom demo yielded several ideas that need to be refined into features

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ready to upgrade the ledger to the Conway era when the hard fork is complete [#1338](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1338)
- Settled on [partial FanOut](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1468) as a good solution to [a few known problems](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/docs/known-issues#head-protocol-limits)
- Work initiated on a suite of network resilience tests [#1552](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1552)
- The Hydra Doom demo yielded several ideas that need to be refined into features.
```

### Hydra Doom

> At the Rare Evo event in Las Vegas we show cased the Hydra Doom demo, a technology demonstration of Hydra where users could play the 1993 id software game Doom and for each frame of the game a smart contract transaction was submitted to a Hydra head which recorded game state, user inputs and validated game state transitions (as a proof of concept, using only some minor logic pertaining to the movement of the player and dying in game).

Author: id software is spelled with lower cases: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Id_Software

![At Rare Evo](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d897190d-ece6-4fa6-b0f0-ec214a58d0e2)

> People were able to connect remotely via https://doom.hydra.family or in person on two custom made arcade cabinets we had constructed for the occasion, and each game session contributed 35 transactions per second. In aggregate we processed 106 million transactions with Hydra during the 78 hours of operation, which is more than the entire history of Cardano main net, and peaked at around 7,200 tps. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People were able to connect remotely via https://doom.hydra.family or in person on two custom-made arcade cabinets we had constructed for the occasion, and each game session contributed 35 transactions per second. In aggregate, we processed 106 million transactions with Hydra during the 78 hours of operation, which is more than the entire history of Cardano main net, and peaked at around 7,200 tps.  
```

![Last screen shot](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f0b1430a-1cdf-4c48-839d-b6d217c8279a)

The demo was very positively received on social media and seems to have rekindled the flames around the Hydra narrative both internally and externally, which hopefully bodes well for both future adoption interest among builders, as well as the prospects of securing funding for the continued development of Hydra from Intersect. 

### Network tests with fault injection

We have set up a simple yet effective [workflow](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/blob/master/.github/workflows/network-test.yaml) capable of simulating a Hydra cluster under high transaction loads and packet loss network failures.

> With this, we aim to consistently reproduce and resolve issues that are causing the Head to become stuck, as outlined in [#1436](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1436).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this, we aim to consistently reproduce and resolve issues that are causing the head to become stuck, as outlined in [#1436](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1436).
```

The workflow specifies a set of high-load scenarios, each of which spins up the same Hydra cluster on `devnet` used during the [getting started](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/docs/getting-started) tutorial and injects network faults using [Pumba](https://github.com/alexei-led/pumba).

> The idea is to allow and encourage everyone to experiment with this workflow and collect summary results, which contain details about the performance within the Head. The fact that these tests are performed with the `hydra-node` being a "blackbox", it also allows us to explore alternative network stacks as a whole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea is to allow and encourage everyone to experiment with this workflow and collect summary results, which contain details about the performance within the head. The fact that these tests are performed with the `hydra-node` being a "blackbox", it also allows us to explore alternative network stacks as a whole.
```

### New landing page

For the Rare Evo event with the public Hydra doom demo (see above), we also figured it would be a good idea to improve the first impression new visitors get from the https://hydra.family website.

> Together with the marketing team of IOG, new landing page content and design was put together. Besides mentioning the key features and why the Hydra head protocol is needed, the new landing page also sports an explanation of how Hydra works using the analogy of a cargo plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The marketing team at IOG collaborated on creating new content and design for the landing page. In addition to highlighting the key features and explaining the importance of the Hydra head protocol, the updated landing page also includes an analogy of how Hydra works, using a cargo plane as an example.
```

![](img/2024-08-hydra-landing-page.png)
<small><center>Screenshot of the new landing page</center></small>

> The original design included an alternative color scheme using <span style={{color: "#12506C"}}>Teal</span> as the primary accent color and <span style={{color: "#721F41"}}>Plum</span> as the secondary and an example is included below. Do you, dear reader, think a new color scheme would be good or do you like the <span style={{color: "#6874e8"}}>Purple</span> main color as-is? Shoot us a message on twitter or [#ask-hydra on Discord](https://discord.com/invite/Qq5vNTg9PT) with your thoughts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original design included an alternative color scheme using <span style={{color: "#12506C"}}>Teal</span> as the primary accent color and <span style={{color: "#721F41"}}>Plum</span> as the secondary. An example is included below. Do you think a new color scheme would be appealing or do you prefer the <span style={{color: "#6874e8"}}>Purple</span> main color as-is? Shoot us a message on twitter or [#ask-hydra on Discord](https://discord.com/invite/Qq5vNTg9PT) with your thoughts.
```

<details>
<summary>Alternative color scheme example</summary>

![](img/2024-08-hydra-other-color-scheme.png)

</details>

### Bugfix: L2 transactions during decommits 

> After releasing the decommit feature which allows users to take funds from the L2 to L1 while the Head is operating we quickly found a bug. While the decommit is pending (funds not yet taken out of the Head) and some user wants to create a new L2 transaction, hydra-node would try to re-apply the pending decommit to the local ledger state which errors out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After releasing the decommit feature that enables users to transfer funds from layer 2 to layer 1 while the head is operational, we quickly identified a bug. When a decommit is pending ( funds have not yet been withdrawn from the head) and a user attempts to create a new layer 2 transaction, the hydra-node attempts to re-apply the pending decommit to the local ledger state, resulting in an error.
```

> We quickly realized that any pending decommit needs to match with the decommit in the new snapshot thus preserved in the next snapshot/s until it is observed. Without this fix our whole decommit feature would be very fragile even unusable so we made sure to quickly draft a failing [test](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1540/files#diff-3479844ad82c0fd2f7af59c36f930cdb540876b9cf4201d67a41da83688500a9R440) and do a proper fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We promptly realized that any pending decommit needs to match with the decommit in the new snapshot and should be preserved in the next snapshot(s) until it is observed. Without this fix, our decommit feature would be extremely fragile, so we made sure to quickly draft a failing [test](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1540/files#diff-3479844ad82c0fd2f7af59c36f930cdb540876b9cf4201d67a41da83688500a9R440) and do a proper fix.
```

### Roadmap

Here is an update on our current roadmap:
- **Cardano transactions signature/proving MVP** [#1457](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1457): the feature is finalized and the last step to completion is to release on the `mainnet`.
- **Cardano Stake Distribution certification** [#955](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/955): the feature is finalized and the last step is to release on `preview`, `preprod` and `mainnet`.
- **Mithril signature diffusion with Cardano network layer PoC** [#1837](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1837): the proof-of-concept is completed.
- **Decentralization of signature orchestration** [#1777](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1777): we have started implementing the feature with some preliminary works. 
- **CIP for Mithril signature diffusion through Cardano network** [#1775](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1775): the draft CIP has been published on the Cardano foundation CIPs repository and is under review.

> 

Reviewer 3: @rezabaram I added this section for the Mithril roadmap. 

Feel free to modify/complete it :+1:

Reviewer 4: Sounds good to me

Author: Do you have a public github roadmap to link to? i.e. something that contains all of the mentioned issues? If not now, that might be something we'd like to use in the future?
